Keyword research [music] is the
foundation of SEO. And if you've tried
it recently, it feels broken. The
keywords that used [music] to work,
informational how-tos, and what is
queries, have gotten eaten alive by AI.
In fact, even if you rank number one,
you're losing around 35% of your clicks
to AI overviews. That's terrifying. But
keyword research isn't dead. [music]
It's just evolved. And if you follow my
five-part strategy, you'll be ahead of
90% of SEOs who haven't caught on yet.
And it all [music] starts with a
10-second hero prompt. When Chat GPT
launched in 2022, people tested it for
everything, including keyword research,
and the consensus, total trash. It sped
out generic content, made up keywords,
and invented fake search volumes. But
here's what most SEOs won't admit. It
wasn't AI's fault. It was the prompts.
When you give AI nothing to work with,
you get nothing useful back. And that
hasn't changed. To find relevant
keywords, you need [music] two things.
First, you need seed keywords, which are
broad terms related to your niche. And
second, [music]
you need modifiers, which are add-ons
like best or howto that turn these seeds
into real searches. Combine good seeds
with good modifiers in a keyword
research tool, [music] and you'll
uncover a treasure trove of keywords
people actually type into Google. That's
exactly what the 10-second hero prompt
does. Just open your AI assistant of
choice and say something like, "I'm
doing keyword research for my coffee
review site, which makes money through
ads, sponsorships, and affiliate
revenue. My target audience are new and
aspiring home baristas. [music] Give me
10 seed keywords that are 1 to two words
max, and five plus modifiers that will
help me surface appropriate content
formats I can use in my keyword
research. The seeds and modifiers should
not share the same words. And now we
have a solid list of seeds and
modifiers, which builds the foundation
for everything that comes next. But
these are just the starting point. The
second part of this strategy is the
keyword multiplier. Just take your seeds
and paste them into a keyword research
tool like HR's keywords explorer. Go to
the matching terms report to see tons of
keyword ideas. Then add your modifiers
using the include filter. [music]
And just like that, you should have
hundreds, maybe even thousands of real
keyword ideas your audience is typing
into [music] Google. But here's the
problem. Some of these keywords are
going to look incredibly enticing. High
volume, high traffic potential, low
keyword difficulty scores, all the right
metrics. But some of them are a trap.
The keywords that used to work,
informational how-tos, what is queries,
even some best of searches, are getting
eaten alive by AI. You can rank number
one and still get almost nothing because
Google already answered the question.
So, you can't just pick keywords that
look good anymore. You have to vet them
harder than ever. And you can do that
with the bid method. The bid method
makes sure that you don't fall into
[music] one of these traps. Before you
commit to any keyword, it needs to pass
three tests. First is the business
potential test. Ask yourself, if I rank
number one for this keyword, does it
actually [music] help my business
achieve its goals? Like, let's say that
you have a review site on espresso
machines. A keyword like what is
espresso has solid volume and very low
difficulty. But think about what people
searching for this [music] actually want
to see. They're not looking to buy
anything, maybe ever. They just want a
quick answer. Compare that to best
espresso machine under $500. Way less
volume, but anyone searching that knows
they want an espresso machine and
they've set a budget. Always choose
keywords that move the needle. Test
number two is to vet intent. Listen, no
matter what you do, if you can't match
the intent of the searcher, you will
never rank. To check intent, just Google
the keyword and look at [music] what's
actually ranking. For example, search
for espresso tamper and you'll see every
top result is an e-commerce product or
category page. This tells us that people
searching this want to buy, not read a
review. So, if you're trying to rank a
blog post here, not going to happen. The
SER gives you insights into what
searchers want. match the intent or move
on. And the final test is the difficulty
check, which just might be the most
important of the three. You need to
choose keywords you actually have a
chance at ranking for. HF's free keyword
difficulty checker is a good place to
start. [music]
Just search for a keyword and you'll see
a score from 0 to 100. The lower the
score, the easier it is to rank. But
let's be real, there's no way a single
number can capture the true difficulty
of ranking in an algorithm Google has
spent billions perfecting. That's why
you need to dig deeper into a page's
metrics. You [music] can do that again
with the free difficulty checker. First,
check the referring domains column. This
shows how many websites link to each
ranking page. More domains generally
means a stronger page because backlinks
are still one of Google's most prominent
ranking signals. Second, look at the DR
or domain rating of the top ranking
pages. This metric represents the
strength of a website's backlink
profile. Higher DR usually means a more
authoritative site, which means tougher
competition. In this case, we've got a
couple low DRs in the top [music] 10.
That's a good sign. Now, these checks
aren't foolproof. Remember, billiondoll
algorithm versus us. But the more boxes
you tick, the better your odds of
finding lower difficulty keywords. By
the way, if you have an HFS account, you
can filter for all of this at once. Set
a max KD of 20, add a lowest DR filter
to around the same, and you've got a
list of keywords that pass all three
tests. So, that's bid, business
potential, intent, and difficulty. If a
keyword passes all three, you should
consider targeting it. Unless the AI
overview is so good, there's no reason
for anyone to click through to your
site. Remember, Google's job is to give
the best result for any query. And
there's hard evidence that for a lot of
queries, AI overviews are the best
result. That's why clicks are down 35%
to top ranking pages when an AI overview
appears. And it's because of a hard
truth most people still won't accept. AI
is better than humans at explaining
stuff. If a query has a simple surface
level answer, no expertise required, no
nuance. There's zero reason for someone
to click anywhere. Google already gave
them what they needed. Mission
accomplished, query resolved, no click
required. So before you commit to any
keyword, just Google it. Look at what
shows up. Put yourself in the searcher
shoe and ask, [music] "Am I satisfied
with this answer or do I need to click
somewhere to learn more?" If the AI
overview nails it, that keyword might be
a trap. But here's the good news. Even
though AI is eating clicks for a ton
offormational keywords, there's still a
whole category of searches AI hasn't
touched for now.
Let me show you something interesting.
Back in 2020, we had an evergreen blog
post ranking consistently near the top
of Google for years. But as chat GBT
launched and AI overviews rolled out for
more queries, our traffic to that post
dropped [music] without it around 77%
from peak to trough despite our rankings
staying flat. Now contrast that with
this page. Traffic has stayed mostly
flat throughout. The difference, this
isn't a blog post, it's a free tool.
Search backlink checker, no AI overview,
mortgage calculator, nothing. Word
counter, nothing. Random name generator,
nothing. Why? Because when someone
searches for a tool, [music]
they need to actually use something. AI
can't replace that yet. So, here's how
you can find opportunities for your site
right now. Go to keywords explorer and
start with broad seeds related to your
niche like coffee and espresso. Head to
the matching terms report and add
modifiers like calculator, checker,
generator, and more. Look for keywords
with decent traffic potential that you
could realistically build. Hire a
developer or ironically use AI to build
it for you. One good tool can outperform
50 blog posts in both traffic and links.
So don't sleep on this. Now tool
keywords seem AI proof for now, but
there's a bigger shift happening not
just in SEO, but across the entire
digital marketing landscape, and it all
comes down to the fifth [music] and
final piece of the puzzle, brand.
There's an electric bike company called
Electric. A few months [music] ago, they
sponsored a YouTube series by Ryan Tran,
one of the biggest creators on the
platform. But instead of a typical ad
[music] read, they donated a bike and
set up a series of challenges throughout
the series. And something crazy [music]
happened. People started talking, not
just about Ryan, but about Electric.
These conversations exploded across
Reddit, Twitter, YouTube comments
everywhere. Now, here's what most people
miss. These conversations aren't just
word of mouth. their training data.
Reddit sign partnerships with both
OpenAI and Google. Every post, every
comment, every brand mention is feeding
the AI systems that power search. And
not so coincidentally after the
sponsorship, Electric's mentions in AI
overview spiked. Their impressions
skyrocketed. And the same happened in
Chat GBT. So now when people search best
electric bike in Google or ask Chat GBT,
what's the best electric bike under
$2,000? Guess who keeps showing up?
Electric. This is the new game. The more
often AI sees your brand connected to a
topic, the more confidently it
recommends you. Now, this might not seem
related to keyword research, but it is.
If you flip the model, instead of
asking, "What keywords should I rank
for?" ask what queries do I want my
brand to be associated with in AI
search? Then work backwards. Say you're
an electric bike company competing with
electric. You'd want to find every query
where they're being mentioned in AI
overviews in chat GPT so you can get
mentioned there too. Go to HS brand
radar, enter your brand, your
competitors, [music] and your niche.
Hover over your brand and click the
number beside others only. And now you
have a list of every keyword in prompt
where your competitors are showing up in
AI and you're not. Keyword research
isn't just about finding a topic and
matching intent anymore. You need to
think about two systems. Google search,
which has changed but is still alive and
well, and AI search, which is deciding
who gets recommended and cited. Master
both and you'll be ahead of 90% of
people still doing keyword research like
nothing has changed. And if you want to
go deeper on ranking and AI, watch our
GEO video where I break down the top
ranking factors for AI search. I'll see
you there.